Before we look at the results however,
I'd like to talk a bit more in detail
about what PCA is actually doing,
and how to work with the results.
Now, I won't be going into the math
mind at all, because that can get
really technical, and is beyond what
I need to get across to you here.
Instead, I'm going to show you
a relatively basic example.
Just so that you can get
the concept behind the process.
If you want to dive deep into
the math and algorithms behind it,
you can find a few resources
in the instructor notes.
So the easiest way to
visualize what PCA does,
is to show how it works
with just two variables.
As we mentioned, PCA captures
all of the variants in the data.
For as many variables as
you're combining with PCA,
you will generally get
a principal component.
For the first component,
it will calculate a line that
represents the best fit for
the data, that will capture as
much of the variance as possible.
Let's refer to this as
the component line.
And see this first line
captures 70% of the variance.
For the second component,
it will calculate another line
that represents the best fit for
the remaining variance, that was not
captured by the first component.
Since the remaining variance should not
be correlated to the original variance
captured, by nature of the calculations,
this is at right angles,
or orthogonal to the first line.
And say this second line captures
20% more of the variants,
that leaves 10% that still
needs to be accounted for.
Now, it becomes harder to
represent visually, but
if you have a third variable, you now
are dealing with three dimensions, and
that line could be calculated along
a completely different plane.
But this continues on for
as many variables as you have in
the data that you're combining.
So for example, with our temperature
data where there are 12 months of data,
we would typically end
up with 12 components.
The point is, that with each component
calculated, there is less and
less variance that hasn't
already been captured.
So the significance of the final
components becomes minimal.
So the key to reducing the variables,
which is the goal of PCA,
is to determine at what point in
the set of components created,
is enough variance captured, that you
don't need to consider anymore of them.
For each component, you get a value
assigned to each object, or
record in your data.
This is basically where that particular
record from the combined variables,
falls along that component line.
For each component, you also get
something called Loadings, which shows
the effect that each particular
variable has on that component.
With the Loadings, the sign of
the value isn't that important.
But it is the size of the value,
that is more significant.
So a loading close to 0, for
a specific variable, has little
effect on that particular component.
So now that I've gone through some of
the background in the weeds content,
let's see how this actually plays out
with our data, and the results we get.
And figure out why we
would want to use them.